---
layout: post
title: "Redesigning Getkw _or_ reinventing the wheel: 0. State of affairs and requirements"
author: Roberto Di Remigio and Radovan Bast
summary: Redesigning Getkw
---

This is part 0 of a series of posts on designing a general input parsing library.
By _general input parsing library_ we mean that the format of
the input is not fixed by the library itself. 

In this post we will cover the state of affairs and lay out in detail the
requirements for our new library.

## State of affairs

The [Getkw library] was designed with the goal of being _general_.
The principle of operation of Getkw is:
1. Give me an input file.
2. I'll parse it and check whether it's a legal input.
4. If it is _not legal_, stop.
3. If input is legal, I'll dump a machine-readable file to disk. The file has all
   possible input parameters set to a value, whether at their default value or the value passed
   by the user.
4. A reader for your language of choice (currently C, C++, and Fortran) will
   gobble the machine-readable file _et voilà_ you have your input parameters.

The structure of the input revolves around the concept of keywords and sections.
**Keywords** are the basic entity, **sections** collect keywords, or other
sections. Loosely speaking, keywords are the bottom layer, while sections can be
recursive. We'll detail this point later.

### How are sanity checks performed?

Each section gets a callback function to perform checks on its contents when the
section is parsed.

### Strengths

- Invalid inputs are blocked before CPU cycles are consumed.
- No regexes are used, rather the input is treated as a formal grammar with its
  [Backus-Naur form].

### Weaknesses

- Getkw is:
  - Combination of Python module and a compiled language.
    The Python module uses `pyparsing.py` to define the grammar for all
    valid input files and performs the actual parsing.
  - A wrapper in a compiled language. This means dependencies! The C++ layer
    depends on Boost Any, which is header-only, but pulls in a lot of other
    stuff from Boost.
- Performing checks **across** sections can be cumbersome.
- The Backus-Naur form is defined in the `getkw.py` Python module and is fixed once and for all.
  This falls short of the aim of generality, since it fixes the format of the input.
   
## Requirements for a Getkw for the future

These are the requirements for the new Getkw:
1. It has to be a lean dependency.
2. Usable from codes in _any_ language.
3. The input is structured as sections and keywords.
4. Sections can be nested.
5. Possibility to easily bypass parsing the file. The data structure holding the
   parsed input data should be easily reproducible programmatically, without
   having to parse a file.
6. Input parser provides a validator mode. This will just check internal
   consistency of the input given by the user. This is guaranteed by defining a formal grammar.
7. Validation is possible not only _within_ a section, but across the entire tree/dictionary/form, without too
   much coupling.
8. Make the grammar customisable.
9. Self-documenting. Adding new sections and keywords will require documentation
   strings to work and there has to be a tool that can parse these and output
   documentation in some standard format.
10. Composable. New sections/keywords should be addable to the parsers in a decentralized manner.

[Getkw library]: https://github.com/dev-cafe/libgetkw
[Backus-Naur form]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Backus%E2%80%93Naur_form
